reworked hifiasm/purge_dups, changed typos/wording, added merqury plots (#3358)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/assembly/tutorials/vgp_workflow_training/tutorial.md

# VGP assembly workflow structure

> The VGP assembly pipeline has a modular organization, consisting of five main subworkflows (fig. 1), each one integrated by a series of data manipulation steps. This modular nature allows for the quality control assessment of intermediate steps, so that one can modify parameters (if necessary) without having to start the assembly from scratch. Additionally, this allows one to adapt the pipeline to the avilable data (*e.g.*, if Bionano data is not available, then it is not necessary to run the Bionano scaffolding workflow). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VGP assembly pipeline has a modular organization, consisting of five main sub-workflows (fig. 1), each one integrated by a series of data manipulation steps. This modular nature allows for the quality control assessment of intermediate steps, so that one can modify parameters (if necessary) without having to start the assembly from scratch. Additionally, this allows one to adapt the pipeline to the available data.
```

Reviewer: The last sentence was removed because it was a bit redundant.

![Figure 3: Genomescope plot](../../images/vgp_assembly/genomescope_plot.png "GenomeScope2 k-mer profile. The first peak located at coverage 21x corresponds to the heterozygous peak. The second peak at coverage 50x, corresponds to the homozygous peak. Estimate of the heterozygous portion is 0.576%. The plot also includes information about the the inferred total genome length (len), genome unique length percent (uniq), overall heterozygosity rate (ab), mean k-mer coverage for heterozygous bases (kcov), read error rate (err), average rate of read duplications (dup) and k-mer size (k).")

This distribution is the result of the Poisson process underlying the generation of sequencing reads. As we can see, the k-mer profile follows a bimodal distribution, indicative of a diploid genome. The distribution is consistent with the theoretical diploid model (model fit > 93%). Low frequency *k*-mers are the result of sequencing errors, and are indicated by the red line. GenomeScope2 estimated a haploid genome size of around 11.7 Mbp, a value reasonably close to the *Saccharomyces* genome size. 

> # HiC-phased assembly with hifiasm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# HiFi phased assembly with hifiasm
```

Reviewer: It shouldn't be modified I think.

> After genome profiling, the next step is to run the **VGP HiC-phased assembly with hifiasm and HiC data workflow**. This workflow uses **hifiasm** (HiC mode) to generate HiC-phased haplotypes (hap1 and hap2). This is in contrast to its default mode, which generates primary and alternate pseudohaplotype assemblies. This workflow includes three tools for evaluating assembly quality: **QUAST**, **BUSCO** and **Merqury**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After genome profiling, the next step is to run the **VGP HiFi phased assembly with hifiasm and HiC data workflow**. This workflow uses **hifiasm** (HiC mode) to generate HiC-phased haplotypes (hap1 and hap2). This is in contrast to its default mode, which generates primary and alternate pseudohaplotype assemblies. This workflow includes three tools for evaluating assembly quality: **QUAST**, **BUSCO** and **Merqury**.
```

# Hybrid scaffolding with Bionano optical maps

Once the assemblies generated by **hifiasm** have been purged, the next step is to run the **VGP hybrid scaffolding with Bionano optical maps workflow**. It will integrate the information provided by optical maps with primary assembly sequences in order to detect and correct structural variants, such as chimeric joins and misoriented contigs. In addition, this workflow includes some additonal steps for evaluating the outputs. 

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: VGP scaffolding with Bionano optical maps workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: VGP hybrid scaffolding with Bionano optical maps workflow
```

Reviewer: I would keep "hybrid".

    
It is also recommended to examine **BUSCO** outputs. In the summary image (fig. 7c), which can be found in the daset `117`, we can appreciate that most of the universal single-copy orthologs are present in our assembly at the expected single-copy.

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. How many scaffolds are in the primary assembly after the hybrid scaffolding?
> 2. What is the size of the largest scaffold? Has this changed with respect to the previous evaluation?
> 3. What is the percentage of completeness on the core set genes in BUSCO? Has Bionano scaffolding increased the completeness?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. The number of contigs is 17.
> > 2. The largest contig is 1.531.728 bp long. This value hasn't changed. This is expected, as the VGP pipeline implementation of Bionano scaffolding does not allow for breaking contigs.
> > 3. The percentage of complete BUSCOs is 95.7%. Yes, it has increased, since in the previous evaluation the completeness percentage was 88.7%.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}
    

> # Scaffolding with HiC data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Hybrid scaffolding with Hi-C data
```

Reviewer: I would keep the original title.
